Docs restructure ICP features (#4955)
dfinity/motoko: doc/md/icp-features/stable-memory.md

sidebar_position: 5
---

> # Stable memory and Regions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Stable memory and regions
```

<!---The small code blocks in this these snippets build upon each other, it might be useful to have a single program run in the backend to eliminate unbound errors-->

> <!---This section could also benefit from illustrations but i'm not sure what md will allow-->

Reviewer: We can use mermaid diagrams(https://mermaid.js.org/) for simple flow-chart-like graphs, or we can ask the design team to create us some visuals.

Author: I think for presentation it would be great to have the design team bring the memory layouts to life. I like the work that the design team does, I'm sure they'll can do a much better job than i can. I hope they go all of for the motoko domain design.

Reviewer: I can submit a request to design, but their return time is usually 3-4 weeks.

Author: Oh well scratch that lol. A few fancy diagrams is not worth a 3-4 week wait. Onward.

> When a canister is upgraded, all heap memory (i.e., variables and data structures in normal memory) is reset. Motoko provides stable memory as a mechanism for preserving data across canister upgrades. Stable regions extend this functionality by allowing more structured and flexible memory management.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a canister is upgraded, all [heap memory](https://internetcomputer.org/docs/building-apps/canister-management/storage#heap-memory) is reset. Motoko utilizes [stable memory](https://internetcomputer.org/docs/building-apps/canister-management/storage#stable-memory) through the [stable storage feature](https://internetcomputer.org/docs/building-apps/canister-management/storage#motoko-storage-handling) for preserving data across canister upgrades. Stable regions extend this functionality by allowing more structured and flexible memory management.
```

## What is a `Region`?

> A **region** is an **isolated chunk of stable (virtual) memory** that can be allocated, grown, and managed independently. It functions like a dedicated section of a storage system, ensuring that its contents remain separate and inaccessible to other parts of the program.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A **region** is an isolated chunk of stable (virtual) memory that can be allocated, grown, and managed independently. It functions like a dedicated section of a storage system, ensuring that its contents remain separate and inaccessible to other parts of the program.
```

> ## `Region` structure

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### `Region` structure
```

> A region in stable memory consists of a **contiguous block of memory** that is allocated and managed independently. Each region has a starting address, a current size, and a capacity that can grow dynamically. One could think of a region similarly to an array, where each position corresponds to an index and data is accessed through byte offsets. However, unlike a traditional array, memory management within a region is manual, requiring explicit tracking of space usage and current position to ensure accurate data access and storage.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A region in stable memory consists of a contiguous block of memory that is allocated and managed independently. Each region has a starting address, a current size, and a capacity that can grow dynamically. One could think of a region similarly to an array, where each position corresponds to an index and data is accessed through byte offsets. However, unlike a traditional array, memory management within a region is manual, requiring explicit tracking of space usage and current position to ensure accurate data access and storage.
```

```motoko no-repl
// Store an 8-bit value at offset 0
Region.storeNat8(myRegion, 0, 42);

// Read the 8-bit value from offset 0
let value = Region.loadNat8(myRegion, 0);  // Returns 42
```

Smaller data types, such as an 8-bit naturals (`Nat8`), can be written and retrieved from a designated offset. The chosen offset determines where in the region the value is stored, making it crucial to manage offsets properly to avoid data corruption.

```motoko no-repl
// Store a 64-bit value at offset 100
Region.storeNat64(myRegion, 100, 123456789);

// Read the 64-bit value from offset 100
let longValue = Region.loadNat64(myRegion, 100);  // Returns 123456789
```

Larger values, such as `Nat64`, require multiple bytes for storage. Allocating offsets with enough space prevents overlapping data. In this case, the 64-bit integer is stored at offset `100`, ensuring it has sufficient space.

```motoko no-repl
// Store a floating-point value at offset 200
Region.storeFloat(myRegion, 200, 3.14159);

// Read the floating-point value from offset 200
let pi = Region.loadFloat(myRegion, 200);  // Returns 3.14159
```

> Floating-point numbers can also be stored in a region. Since these values occupy multiple bytes, offsets should be spaced accordingly to avoid overwriting adjacent data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

> Regions also allows storing and retrieving binary data as blobs. This is useful for handling arbitrary sequences of bytes, such as serialized objects or encoded information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`Regions` also allows storing and retrieving binary data as blobs. This is useful for handling arbitrary sequences of bytes, such as serialized objects or encoded information.
```

```motoko no-repl
// Create a blob
let myData = Blob.fromArray([1, 2, 3, 4, 5]);

// Store the blob at offset 300
Region.storeBlob(myRegion, 300, myData);

// Read 5 bytes from offset 300
let retrievedData = Region.loadBlob(myRegion, 300, 5);  // Returns the same blob
```

> Blobs can be stored at any offset, but their size must be considered when choosing a starting position. Retrieving the correct number of bytes ensures that data integrity is maintained when working with binary storage in a region. Proper offset management and ensuring adequate space for each data type are critical for efficient memory handling in stable regions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Blobs can be stored at any offset, but their size must be considered when choosing a starting position. Retrieving the correct number of bytes ensures that data integrity is maintained when working with binary storage in a `Region`. 
```

Reviewer: Last sentence is redundant

## Memory layout strategies

> While the basic operations above demonstrate how to store and retrieve individual values in a region, real-world applications typically require more organized approaches to memory management. The following memory layout strategies build upon these fundamental operations to create structured patterns for data organization. These strategies provide systematic ways to **allocate**, **track**, and **access** data within regions, allowing developers to implement more complex data structures while maintaining efficient memory usage. Each strategy offers different trade-offs between simplicity, flexibility, and performance depending on your application's specific requirements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While the basic operations above demonstrate how to store and retrieve individual values in a `Region`, real-world applications typically require more organized approaches to memory management. The following memory layout strategies build upon these fundamental operations to create structured patterns for data organization. These strategies provide systematic ways to allocate, track, and access data within `Region`s, allowing developers to implement more complex data structures while maintaining efficient memory usage. Each strategy offers different trade-offs between simplicity, flexibility, and performance depending on your application's specific requirements.
```

### Sequential

> In sequential storage, data is written **one after the other**, tracking the next available position to prevent overwriting. This approach appends new data to the **end of the region**, recording its size before the actual content. Since data is stored continuously, fragmentation is minimized, but tracking **nextPosition** is essential to avoid overwriting.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In sequential storage, data is written one after the other, tracking the next available position to prevent overwriting. This approach appends new data to the end of the `Region`, recording its size before the actual content. Since data is stored continuously, fragmentation is minimized, but tracking the next position is essential to avoid overwriting.
```

```motoko no-repl
var nextPosition : Nat64 = 0;

// Store a series of values sequentially
func storeSequential(value : Blob) : Nat64 {
  let position = nextPosition;
  let size = Nat64.fromNat(value.size());
  
  // Store the size followed by the data
  Region.storeNat64(myRegion, position, size);
  Region.storeBlob(myRegion, position + 8, value);
  
  // Update the next available position
  nextPosition := position + 8 + size;
  
  // Return the position where we stored the data
  position
}
```

### Fixed-size entry

> Fixed-size storage divides memory into **uniformly sized slots**, making it easier to access entries at predictable positions. Each entry is assigned a **fixed slot**, making lookups straightforward using `index * ENTRY_SIZE`. This method simplifies **retrieval** but may **waste space** if entries contain less data than the allocated size.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Fixed-size storage divides memory into uniformly sized slots, making it easier to access entries at predictable positions. Each entry is assigned a fixed slot, making lookups straightforward using `index * ENTRY_SIZE`. This method simplifies retrieval but may waste space if entries contain less data than the allocated size.
```

```motoko no-repl
let ENTRY_SIZE : Nat64 = 100;  // Each entry is 100 bytes

// Store in a specific entry slot
func storeEntry(index : Nat64, data : Blob) {
  assert Nat64.fromNat(data.size()) <= ENTRY_SIZE;
  
  let position = index * ENTRY_SIZE;
  Region.storeBlob(myRegion, position, data);
}

// Read from a specific entry slot
func readEntry(index : Nat64, size : Nat) : Blob {
  let position = index * ENTRY_SIZE;
  Region.loadBlob(myRegion, position, size)
}
```

### Index-based

> For variable-sized data, an **index region** is used to track where each entry is stored within a separate **data region**. This method maintains **two separate memory regions**: one for **indexes** that store positions and sizes, and another for **actual data**. Using an index allows efficient access to **variable-length** data while avoiding fragmentation issues.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For variable-sized data, an index `Region` is used to track where each entry is stored within a separate data `Region`. This method maintains two separate memory `Regions`: one for **indexes** that store positions and sizes and one for **actual data**. Using an index allows efficient access to variable-length data while avoiding fragmentation issues.
```

```motoko no-repl
// Two regions: one for index, one for data
let indexRegion = Region.new();
let dataRegion = Region.new();
var dataPosition : Nat64 = 0;

// Store data and update index
func storeWithIndex(index : Nat64, data : Blob) {
  let size = Nat64.fromNat(data.size());
  
  // Store position and size in the index
  Region.storeNat64(indexRegion, index * 16, dataPosition);
  Region.storeNat64(indexRegion, index * 16 + 8, size);
  
  // Store actual data
  Region.storeBlob(dataRegion, dataPosition, data);
  
  // Update next data position
  dataPosition += size;
}

// Retrieve data using index
func retrieveByIndex(index : Nat64) : Blob {
  let position = Region.loadNat64(indexRegion, index * 16);
  let size = Region.loadNat64(indexRegion, index * 16 + 8);
  
  Region.loadBlob(dataRegion, position, Nat64.toNat(size))
}
```

## Best practices

> Managing stable memory effectively requires structuring data in a way that ensures **compatibility, scalability, and reliability**. Using **versioning, metadata headers, and transaction logs** can help maintain a well-organized memory layout.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Managing stable memory effectively requires structuring data in a way that ensures compatibility, scalability, and reliability. It is best practice to use versioning, metadata headers, and transaction logs to help maintain a well-organized memory layout.
```

### Versioning data

> Including a version marker at the beginning of a region ensures compatibility across different data formats and future upgrades. This approach ensures that **older versions** of the stored data remain accessible while allowing **new formats** to be introduced. The version marker, typically stored at offset `0`, is checked before performing any operations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Including a version marker at the beginning of a `Region` ensures compatibility across different data formats and future upgrades. This approach ensures that older versions of the stored data remain accessible while allowing new formats to be introduced. The version marker, typically stored at offset `0`, is checked before performing any operations.
```

```motoko no-repl
// When initializing a region
if (Region.size(myRegion) == 0) {
  // Initialize with version 1
  Region.grow(myRegion, 1);
  Region.storeNat64(myRegion, 0, 1);
}

// When reading, check version
let version = Region.loadNat64(myRegion, 0);
if (version == 1) {
  // Handle version 1 data format
} else if (version == 2) {
  // Handle version 2 data format
}
```

### Metadata header

> A metadata header at the beginning of a region allows efficient tracking of **data version, entry count, and available space**. This structure provides a **centralized reference** for managing stored data, preventing unnecessary scanning of the entire memory region to determine its state.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A metadata header at the beginning of a `Region` allows efficient tracking of data version, entry count, and available space. This structure provides a centralized reference for managing stored data, preventing unnecessary scanning of the entire `Region` to determine its state.
```

```motoko no-repl
// Metadata structure:
// Offset 0: Version (8 bytes)
// Offset 8: Entry count (8 bytes)
// Offset 16: Next available position (8 bytes)
// Offset 24: Data starts here

// Update metadata
func updateMetadata(version : Nat64, count : Nat64, position : Nat64) {
  Region.storeNat64(myRegion, 0, version);
  Region.storeNat64(myRegion, 8, count);
  Region.storeNat64(myRegion, 16, position);
}

// Read metadata
func getMetadata() : {version : Nat64; count : Nat64; position : Nat64} {
  {
    version = Region.loadNat64(myRegion, 0);
    count = Region.loadNat64(myRegion, 8);
    position = Region.loadNat64(myRegion, 16);
  }
}
```

### Transaction log pattern

> A transaction log pattern enables **efficient appends** while maintaining a structured, reliable state. This approach ensures that **new log entries are appended sequentially**, preventing data corruption and supporting an **event-driven architecture** where changes can be tracked over time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A transaction log pattern enables efficient appends while maintaining a structured, reliable state. This approach ensures that new log entries are appended sequentially, preventing data corruption and supporting an event-driven architecture where changes can be tracked over time.
```

```motoko no-repl
// Add an entry to a log
func appendToLog(data : Blob) {
  let meta = getMetadata();
  let position = meta.position;
  let size = Nat64.fromNat(data.size());
  
  // Store size followed by data
  Region.storeNat64(myRegion, position, size);
  Region.storeBlob(myRegion, position + 8, data);
  
  // Update metadata
  updateMetadata(
    meta.version, 
    meta.count + 1, 
    position + 8 + size
  );
}
```

## Example

> This example illustrates the simultaneous use of stable variables and stable memory. It uses a single stable variable, `state`, to keep track of the two regions and their size in bytes, but stores the contents of the log directly in stable memory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This example illustrates the simultaneous use of stable variables and stable memory. It uses a single stable variable, `state`, to keep track of the two `Region`s and their size in bytes, but stores the contents of the log directly in stable memory.
```

  // Count of elements (Blobs) that have been logged.
  public func size() : async Nat64 {
      state.elems_count
  };

  // Constant-time random access to previously-logged Blob.
  public func get(index : Index) : async Blob {
    assert index < state.elems_count;
    let pos = Region.loadNat64(state.elems, index * elem_size);
    let size = Region.loadNat64(state.elems, index * elem_size + 8);
    let elem = { pos ; size };
    Region.loadBlob(state.bytes, elem.pos, Nat64.toNat(elem.size))
  };

  // Add Blob to the log, and return the index of it.
  public func add(blob : Blob) : async Index {
    let elem_i = state.elems_count;
    state.elems_count += 1;

    let elem_pos = state.bytes_count;
    state.bytes_count += Nat64.fromNat(blob.size());

    regionEnsureSizeBytes(state.bytes, state.bytes_count);
    Region.storeBlob(state.bytes, elem_pos, blob);

    regionEnsureSizeBytes(state.elems, state.elems_count * elem_size);
    Region.storeNat64(state.elems, elem_i * elem_size + 0, elem_pos);
    Region.storeNat64(state.elems, elem_i * elem_size + 8, Nat64.fromNat(blob.size()));
    elem_i
  }
};
```

## Performance considerations

> Efficient use of stable memory requires optimizing **read and write operations** to reduce overhead. **Batching** multiple small writes into fewer, larger operations improves performance by minimizing the number of memory transactions. Large data structures should be **aligned to page boundaries** whenever possible, as crossing page boundaries can lead to additional processing overhead. Frequently accessed data should be **cached in native memory** to avoid repeated stable memory reads, which are slower than standard heap operations. Since stable memory is persistent, **temporary or short-lived data** should be stored in native memory instead, reducing unnecessary stable memory usage.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Efficient use of stable memory requires optimizing read and write operations to reduce overhead. Batching multiple small writes into fewer, larger operations improves performance by minimizing the number of memory transactions. Large data structures should be aligned to page boundaries whenever possible, as crossing page boundaries can lead to additional processing overhead. Frequently accessed data should be cached in native memory to avoid repeated stable memory reads, which are slower than standard heap operations. Since stable memory is persistent, temporary or short-lived data should be stored in native memory instead, reducing unnecessary stable memory usage.
```

    let elem_pos = state.bytes_count;
    state.bytes_count += Nat64.fromNat(blob.size());

    regionEnsureSizeBytes(state.bytes, state.bytes_count);
    Region.storeBlob(state.bytes, elem_pos, blob);

    regionEnsureSizeBytes(state.elems, state.elems_count * elem_size);
    Region.storeNat64(state.elems, elem_i * elem_size + 0, elem_pos);
    Region.storeNat64(state.elems, elem_i * elem_size + 8, Nat64.fromNat(blob.size()));
    elem_i
  }
};
```

## Performance considerations

Efficient use of stable memory requires optimizing read and write operations to reduce overhead. Batching multiple small writes into fewer, larger operations improves performance by minimizing the number of memory transactions. Large data structures should be aligned to page boundaries whenever possible, as crossing page boundaries can lead to additional processing overhead. Frequently accessed data should be cached in native memory to avoid repeated stable memory reads, which are slower than standard heap operations. Since stable memory is persistent, temporary or short-lived data should be stored in native memory instead, reducing unnecessary stable memory usage.

### Memory usage estimation

> Estimating the amount of memory needed requires calculating the expected storage requirements based on entry size and quantity. The total memory requirement is determined by multiplying the average entry size by the number of expected entries, then adding an overhead buffer for metadata and alignment, typically between 10–20%. The resulting size is then divided by 65)536 bytes (the size of a page) to determine the number of pages required.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Estimating the amount of memory needed requires calculating the expected storage requirements based on entry size and quantity. The total memory requirement is determined by multiplying the average entry size by the number of expected entries, then adding an overhead buffer for metadata and alignment, typically between 10–20%. The resulting size is then divided by 65_536 bytes (the size of a page) to determine the number of pages required.
```
